Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this case you're going to have a closer look at shallow specifically trying to make them look a little
bit better at the moment they look okay on the left hand side you can see one of the issues we have.
Does it really look like much of a contact shadow but over on the right we actually have shadows where
the pins are touching the ground and before they were just a bit faded.
That's no good.
But in order to have a decent look at this let's go have a look at a default scene and work it out from
there with nice simple objects.
Okay.
So over in our default scene here I'm going to add in a plane and scale it's up and I left my cube up
by one.
And I'm going to turn on shaded mode.
The reason for this is if we're in shaded mode we get to see our shadows.
If we're in any other mode we typically do not.
Okay.
So what we have here are a few issues.
So the first one if I turn off all overlays by clicking the little button next to the overlays we can
zoom in without any of the UI interfering and we can see that at the moment here on the corner it gets
lighter.
That shouldn't be the case.
And we also see that the shadow itself is a bit jagged around the edges.
We'll have a look at both those issues before we do that.
I want to add another type of light into the scene so let's say my overlays back on I'm going to duplicate
this lamp that's already here.
We get a second shadow when we do that and I'm going to scroll down to the lamp properties and I'm gonna
change it to a sun lamp.
Now I'm going to hide that in a moment but to make sure that I have got the right lamp and I'm adjusting
it appropriately.
There we go.
If I turn the lights on and off we get a shadow which is overpowered at the moment and we can also have
that SA point lamp and that's our sun lamp.
So they've both produced shadows and in fact the sun lamp.
You can see it's much more jagged than the other one was.
And look at that.
That looks really horrible around.
As if it's not connected to the floor.
If I rotate the sun lamp ever so slightly so we get a slightly stretched out shadow.
Can I get it quiet.
They're not quite as rotated.
There we go.
It's a nice tall shadow.
It shouldn't look like that around the edge here.
And one fell quickly show you is if we change our rendering mode under the render tab from eevee to
cycles we actually get a proper deep shadow coming from that corner.
So let's go back to eevee for the moment and have a look at our settings.
Hey guys.
Mark you've probably noticed some changes going on in a newer version of Blender if you're not using
the current version in the video the first thing you might notice is if we select the light from the
outline or in the top right and go down to the shadow options it's actually on by default now that it
was off in the video is now on you'll also notice that we have lost a couple of options.
We've lost the ESM the ESM jot down.
This is because they've reverted to a different shadow mapping.
So those launches no longer exist and the bias options are now all combined down into one.
The same is that the contact shadows and you will find also if you travel because you are missing the
softness on both of those if you customize up to the render settings under the shadows you'll find a
checkbox for soft shadows and that will cover the soft shadows slider and it will calculate it a lot
better with a might make a.
The first thing to look at is the lamp properties itself.
Now whilst we don't need to worry about those cycles we do when it comes to the Eevee render engine.
So we scroll down and have a look under the lamp properties.
We scroll down further.
There is an option to turn off and on shadows.
Well we do want them on in this case but it's worthwhile noting that you can turn them off if whatever
you're trying to do doesn't need shadows or in fact to shadow spoil the look of it.
That might be especially true when it comes to things of a tune shaded or more comic book style or more
cartoon like style.
So we need shadows turned on the next thing we need to look at is the contact shadows.
So this is where one object meets another.
We turn on contact shadows we see that suddenly down at the bottom here we appear to get an extra shadow
appears and then it kind of fades out and we get this light line here.
So this is where we need to play with these settings perhaps increasing the distance and blend the two
types of shadow together.
Now it's not quite there yet.
I would suggest increasing the softness ever so slightly until we can get it almost matching.
There we go.
That's close enough for me especially at this type of distance.
But what about this horrible jacket ness.
Well this is the reason why we have two different light types in our scene because evey calculates them
differently and oh look at that when we're at a different angle it behaves slightly differently so that's
another thing just to remember there that we may need to look through the camera to work out if the
shadow that we think we have is the one we're going to get.
So let's have a look at this jagged edge along here because that is not a nice edge at all we'd want
it be a bit smoother basically.
So what can we do here.
Well if we go to the render properties again make sure you're on the Eevee render engine and I'm going
to scroll down until we get to the shadow section when we open that up.
We get a couple of options.
We have the method of calculating the shadows ESM and V S.M. ESM is great.
It's lovely and quick.
It's not as I would say accurate and not as neat but if you were doing an animation ESM would result
in a quicker render then ESM would if you're just doing it still perhaps she should pick BSM but as
you can see you can switch between the two and they do give slightly different results.
In fact in this case v ESM looks a lot more jagged than ESM so on the first look he may think oh no
Veer seems horrible and never use again but then we need to look at the cube size and the cascade size
when we're dealing with the cube size was specifically talking about two types of lamp points an area
like shadows.
So if we turn off our sun lamp for the moment by just hiding it and turn on our lights we end up with
oh we haven't sorted out the contact shadow here but let's focus on this jacket edge along the end here.
If we change the cube size to 64 we get it's looking really really jagged the benefits of it looking
really really jacket is it renders really really quickly but we can increase that from sixty four to
four thousand ninety six and then we get a really really smooth shadow at the sacrifice of performance.
So that's what all of this is is a trade off between performance and I would dare say reality but a
more realistic shadow.
You can also turn on high bit depth and soft shadows and that will really make the shadow soft around
the edges like in real life.
However it will have a performance impact.
You will find though if I set this back to 64 and turn off those two options you will find that changing
the cascade size will not have any difference whatsoever when it comes to an aerial lamp or a point
lamp.
However what it will make a difference to is our sun lamp.
So we've got our sun lamp here and well our shadows disappeared.
That's because we set the Cosco size 64 we turn it up we start to see that it comes into reality is
it where it's quite chunky at the moment he says it's four thousand ninety six we get a lovely smooth
edge.
Of course we can't go any higher than that so you will in this case and that was some Jack bidness around
the edge.
We can make it a bit softer by turning on soft shadows that will try and smooth this out and you can
see noticeably there's a slow down in even calculating this and I'm not sure that I like the effect
that we've got there but we can also turn on high bit depth as well to add to the realism and this particular
case I think we need to go back and tweak the settings under the sun lamp to work out what's going to
work best here.
I don't like the look of that but you may find switching across the VSO erm makes a little bit of a
difference.
So let's go through it once more if we turn on soft shadows that's the thing that's causing this hardness
and if we turn on high bit depth we get a slightly different shadow specially on these faded areas I
don't know if you saw that there but with high bit depth turned on we don't get these horrible artefacts
This is probably going to show up more under our lights itself so let's go back to working on the cube
size of say a thousand and let's try VSO here if we go high bit depth it actually helps out massively
on this edge here for instance as well because it's all mottled here with a very light shadow we turn
on the high bit that it's a lot lot smoother so there's various options that you can play with with
each try and get your shadows looking much better now with big objects like this cube you tend to find
that shadows don't need much altering.
But our ball and pins are a lot smaller.
So in order to get the same detail in our shadows we're either going to have to make those objects bigger.
We shouldn't be in the interests of trying to keep things semi realistic or of course we could turn
up the resolution of our shadows and that will depend on the lighting that you've got in your scene
as well.
So now we've had a look at the very shadow options.
It's time for your challenge.
Okay see your challenge is to create some lighting for your scene at the moment I just stuck with a
default point lamp.
I'm going to make it just a little bit better I'm going to go for a three point light setup myself although
feel free to experiment.
Consider a backdrop at the moment especially if you've been following along.
We've just got a plane on the ground and then this horrible gray background so consider adding a backdrop
to your scene.
Make sure your pins look like they're connected to the floor so you're gonna have to tweak those shadows
settings in order to achieve that.
Go ahead pulls the video now and give that a go Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and make sure that we've got all seen sets up with lighting and shadows okay.
So here we go.
We've got a bowling scene open.
I'm going to start having a look at my lights.
I'm going to switch the shading mode to rendered so I can see the shadows.
Without them it would be a bit useless.
And I'm going to scroll down to my lights settings now do bear in mind that whilst we're dealing with
this light 0 0 1 is a different light from the one that was copied over in the standard layout scene.
So if we wanted the same light everywhere we would have to link them together of course we can just
move this lighting rig that we're currently creating back to the standard layout later on if we wanted
to.
So it doesn't matter in this particular thing but it's just something to be aware of.
So let's go back to our smash and add in some different options it's a contact shadows.
Now the contact shows themselves.
We don't need too much detail in here but we do need it to look a little bit better than that we can
see that the thickness there if we turn that all the way up it just doesn't look great.
So so we can turn on a little bit and we can soften it up as well.
That would just make it look much better.
Okay.
So that's the contact shadow done.
But what about the rest of the shadow itself.
Now there are loads of options that we can tweak here but to be quite honest I don't think we need to
go into too much depth.
One of the things I've noticed is that the shadow itself doesn't seem to be that dark and that's fine.
But it does mean that as we look at this our contact shadow seems to go and fade out very very quickly.
So I've clicked away from it because I've clicked on the pin there.
Let's go back to our lights here and just have a look at the other options that we can do here.
I'm going to increase my exponents slightly and that should make things ever so slightly darker.
OK brilliant.
Now I'm going to go to my render settings and go to my shadows.
Now I'm working with ESM at the moment.
I could switch it to VM.
You'll notice that it looks horrible initially and then we'll have to come in probably use high bit
depth to get to the place we want and turn up this cube map a little bit.
But you can see if we go really high it makes things quite soft again depending on whether that's what
you want.
It's entirely up to you but I will warn you that using the ESM as I've mentioned is much more intensive
and potentially has the side effects of taking longer to rent.
So I'm going to stick with ESM for my own sanity at the moment and let's just have a look at what soft
shadows does to us.
Does it do anything appreciable so let's have a look at it from the camera's perspective.
So soft shadows on soft shadows off doesn't make any difference if I turn this down to 1 0 2 4 and then
put soft shadows on soft shadows off.
Now I don't see any difference there.
In fact high bit depth I can turn that off as well.
So some of these things will make a big difference and some of them just won't.
I'm happy with my contact shadows there.
The next thing I'm going to do is I'm going to duplicate my lights and move it around to the side.
So at the moment it's all the way over there I'm going to move it a bit closer and I'm going to duplicate
it and place another one over here and then I'm gonna go to those light settings and just turn down
the brightness ever so slightly I'm going to set out half the brightness of before.
Okay.
That's brilliant.
We've got fewer harsh shadows on our objects so we're almost there.
I would like to create a background.
I'm going to create a background in a slightly different way.
This is going to be parts of our lighting and camera sets up because it's going to be the background
to our scene.
And I'm going to create it by adding in a cylinder looks pretty good.
I'm just going to move that over here.
Now what this is gonna do if I could leave it like that but what I was thinking was going into edit
mode and selecting a semicircle from it.
So maybe here to here.
That's delete those vertices and then I'll be able to press El on this slots over here and delete them
completely from the scene.
Now if we have a look we're not quite there yet.
We're gonna have to scale that up and move it across and probably move it towards the camera as well
so we have a look at where it is currently.
Or we could rotate that towards the camera and move it here.
And what that will give us is it will give us a backdrop which is a bit better than the boring gray
that we have before.
The internal shades smooth and we've also got a gradient going across there.
So now I can go ahead give it a material let's give it the name.
Background now I could of course go in and model loads of extra details.
I don't want to do that at this point.
I'm going to give it some dark color in the background.
I mean this is where you really get to pick where you're going I'm going to do this or that color.
I don't know what you call it's over deep purple and we've got this gradient because it's curved.
We will actually get a decent gradient across the backdrop so that's starting to look really nice and
of course in reality it's all smoke and mirrors and that's something to bear in mind whenever you're
creating anything like this.
Smoke and mirrors is fine.
Now if we were to move this too close you can see that the shadow starts casting on our scene so you
may want to push this through an in or you may need to adjust your lights if you do have shadows being
cast from these.
I'm happy with mine looking like that for the moment though and I don't think I can see any of those
rendering artifacts in it.
Brilliant.
So the final thing that I do want to do here is bring these two lamps down even further.
The re are.
So I'm starting to get a shadow appearing in this case.
So what I can do there is I can bring the lights closer and turn it down and let's also let's bring
it closer which we have done here and then I'm going to turn it down a little.
So maybe make it three watts.
That seems far too bright for a three watt bulb unless it's talking about incandescents Of course.
There we go.
So we've got some lovely gradient Phil across the background got better shadows on our scene.
Excellent.
How did yours turn out.
I'm going to rent the mine out now should really saved before doing that.
I always feel a bit bad when I just hit render.
Just in case blender crashes you just lose your work so I'm going to call this smash with lighting and
I I do really like keeping a progress of how I'm progressing and I suggest you do as well.
It's great in the future to look back at your early work as you're developing as an artist you'll often
think that you're not good enough.
I certainly do myself.
And then you get to the point where you look at some of your early work and you think oh my look how
much I've improved so do keep your early work as you go.
I'm going to save my work here just in case something happens like blender crashing it's not happened
yet fortunately but it could always do that.
Whether or not we're in a beta so please share your work.
Have you set up your lighting.
I'm looking forward to seeing it and I'll see you all in the next lecture.